Charge {#the-basics}
======

So electricity is all about *Charge*. What it is, how it moves and what
it's useful for. Charge is the name given to a weird property that amber
(the material) has when it was rubbed with wool by the Ancient
Greeks[^1]. The Greeks noticed that the amber would attract other small
object such as fur and repel other pieces of amber that has been rubbed
with fur. It was said that amber acquired a net *charge*. It was also
noticed (much later in time) that if you rubbed glass with silk it would
attract the silk - it gained a charge. However, amber (plastic works
too) that has been rubbed with fur would then attract this glass rod,
not repel it. This lead people to believe there were two distinct types
of electric charge and Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790) started calling
these *positive* and *negative*. Hence the phrase *"opposites attract\"*
or more formally:

> Two positive charges or two negative charges repel each other. A
> positive and a negative charge attract each other.

The majority of electrical inventions and developments were built using
this level of knowledge. The notion of a particle nature to charge was
not suspected until much later. A weird result of this time delay
between experimentation with electricity and a fundamental understanding
has lead to some *conventions* that you may find irritating[^2]. We now
know, that was happening in the process of rubbing various materials
with other materials is that **electrons** are being transferred. The
electron is a *fundamental particle*[^3] which we say has charge $-e$.
The electron is taken to define the fundamental unit of charge.

There are particles with positive charge also. The proton is the classic
example, which has a charge of $+e$. It should be noted that there are
other particles with other values of positive and negative charge. For
instance, there are two types of quarks, one with charge $+2/3e$ and
another type with charge $-1/3 e$. The fractional values are purely
based on the fact that we hold the electron as the unit of charge. As
the quarks were discovered much more recently that the electron, the
standard of charge was already well established.

However for practical purposes, as we rarely deal with small numbers of
electrons, other (more appropriate) units of charge exists. The standard
unit is that of **Coulombs**, which, if we were to measure the electrons
charge in Coulombs it would be $-e = -1.602176 \times 10^{-19}C$. An
incredibly tiny value. For instance to make up -1 Coulombs of charge
requires over 6 billion billion electrons[^4]. A number so large that is
makes no sense to imagine.

The way the Coulomb is defined is in terms of macroscopic quantities.
Quantities that physicists in the previous centuries would have been
able to measure and use. A Coulomb is defined the be the amount of
charge that passes a fixed point when a *current* of 1 *Ampere* flows
for one second. So what is current and what is an Ampere?

Current
=======

Current in terms of electricity is the motion of charge from one region
to another. Just as in the sea current refers to motion of water from
one place to another. However, current was defined and used to describe
electricity well before we the particles that make up charge. So whats
referred to as *conventional current* is defined to be the flow of
positive charge. Despite the fact that the positively charged objects
(the atomic nuclei) don't move in conductors, and its the negatively
charged electrons which flow.

This is someone confusing when you first see it, but what you have to
remember is that physics and especially electricity were studied well
before the 21st century. We have see that the Ancient Greeks were
investigating the basics of this phenomena, and it was until 1879 that
the notion of the electron was introduced and it wasn't discovered until
1897. To put this in perspective the electric motor was invented in the
1820s, that's 70 years earlier. So we had been using electricity for
quite literally a lifetime before we started fully understanding what
was happening at the atomic level.

Back to current, so current, denoted by $I$, is defined to be the amount
of charge passing a certain point per second.
$$I = \frac{\Delta Q}{ \Delta t}.$$ Current is measured in terms of
$Amperes$ or $Amps$ for short. $1$ ampere is defined to be one coulomb
per second [^5].

Drift Velocity
--------------

Inside a conducting wire such as the copper wires that supply power to
the plugs in your house. The motion of the electrons is not a smooth
journey from the national grid[^6] to your plug. They will move
erratically, bouncing off the nuclei of the metal atoms. This chaotic
motion means that despite the electrons moving very fast, it takes them
a relatively long time to travel any macroscopic distance. We get a
useful velocity by taking the average of the electron's velocity over
some small time scale, we call this new velocity the *drift velocity*.
Note that this will be in the opposite direction to the current (due to
electrons being negatively charged).

The reason we are interested in this drift velocity is that it is
helpful when talking about currents. Imagine we have a cylindrical wire
with cross section $A$. In some small amount of time denoted $\Delta t$,
the electrons will move a length of $v_d \cdot \Delta t$. Considering a
section of the wire that is $v_d \Delta t$ long, assume there are $n$
electrons moving within it. As each electron has a charge of $-e$, and
the wire has a cross sectional area of $A$, we will have that the total
charge that move through this section is given by
$$\Delta Q  = +e (n\cdot A\cdot v_d \cdot \Delta t )$$. So the current
is given by $$I = \frac{\Delta Q}{\Delta t} = e n A v_d$$

So why do electrons flow through wires? They can't always do that,
otherwise I'd get electric shocks from every piece of metal. So what
causes them to move? What have we assumed in the above figure? To
explain the origin of this motion, we introduce the idea of *potential
differece*.

Potential Difference
====================

A potential difference is what makes electricity flow, and it usually
provided by batteries or cells. These are an objects with a negative
terminal at one end and a positive terminal at the other, and so when
its connected via circuit it cause electrons to flow to even the
charges. I like to think of it in terms of hills and balls, a potential
difference sets up a hill with the high end being the negative terminal
and bottom of the hill being the positive terminal, and the battery as a
sort of lift/ elevator back up to the top of the hill. However, this is
entirely heuristic and shouldn't be relied on too heavily for
calculations.

In physics, we say that a potential difference provides the energy to
cause charge to flow. So it measures the amount of energy needed to move
one Coulomb of charge between the two points your measuring. So letting
$W$ denote the *energy transferred* or *work done* and let $Q$ be the
amount of charge we have the formula for potential difference as
$$V = \frac{W}{Q}$$ and its measured in *Volts*, hence the letter $V$.
$1$ Volt is defined potential difference between two points that will
give 1 Joule per Coulomb of charge that passes through it.

An alternative way to think about this notion is to rearrange the
formula to give $$W = V \cdot Q.$$ Which you can read as saying the
amount of energy to move a charge, $Q$, through a potential difference
of $V$ is given by the product of $V$ and $Q$.

Resistance and Resistivity
==========================

The resistance of a material is way to tell how good a conductor it is.
For instance, copper has a very low resistance and wood has a very high
resistance. Resistance is defined to be the ratio of potential
difference across a sample of the material to the current flowing
through it. $$R = \frac{V}{I}$$

So if a material has a low resistance, then it means for a given voltage
it has a high current, and if a material has a high resistance then for
the same voltage the current would be much less.

The resistance of a material relies on its shape and size as well as
what its made of. To remove the shape and size dependance we can talk
about the *resistivity* of a material. Which we can relate to the
resistance as follows: $$R = \frac{\rho L}{A}$$ Where here $\rho$ is the
resistivity, $L$ is length of the material and $A$ is the cross
sectional area. Basically, the longer the piece of material we have, the
higher its resistance regardless of what its made of[^7]. The cross
sectional area you can think of how wide the wire is that we are
examining. Therefore the wider the wire, the lower resistance it will
have.

Resistance is measure in **Ohms** and is given the symbol $\Omega$. $1$
Ohm is equal to $1$ Volt per Ampere, i.e. $1\Omega = 1 V/ A$.

Conductance and conductivity
----------------------------

The conductivity of a material is the opposite of its resistance. It is
a measure of how well electrons flow through the material. It is usually
given the letter $G$ and is defined to be the *reciprocal* of the
resistance, i.e. $$G = {1\over R} = {I\over V}.$$ We can apply the same
logic as above for the resistivity to a notion of *conductivity*. Notice
that $$G = {1 \over R} = {A \over \rho L},$$ so we define the
conductivity as $\sigma = {1 \over \rho}$ so we have that
$$G = {\sigma A \over L}$$

Resistors and circuits
----------------------

A resistor is a circuit device that is designed to have a certain
resistance between its ends. The ones we see in day to day life are
cylindrical and can range in value from $0.01 \Omega$ to $10^7 \Omega$.

The symbol for a resistor are shown in
FigureÂ [\[fig:resistors\]](#fig:resistors){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:resistors"}

When we put resistors in series or parallel we can treat this system of
resistors as one resistor with an effective resistance. And the
effective resistance is calculated using various rules that we will
state now and derive later on.

If we consider
FigureÂ [\[fig:seriesparallel:series\]](#fig:seriesparallel:series){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seriesparallel:series"}, we can ask ourselves is there a
way to represent this circuit in the form of
FigureÂ [\[fig:effective\]](#fig:effective){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:effective"}? The answer is yes, and the formula for the
*effective resistance*, $R_{\text{eff}}$, is given by
$$R_{\text{eff}} = R_1 + R_2 + R_3.$$

We can ask ourselves the same thing for
FigureÂ [\[fig:seriesparallel:parallel\]](#fig:seriesparallel:parallel){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seriesparallel:parallel"} and the answer is again yes and
the formula for the effective resistance is given by
$$\frac{1}{R_{\text{eff}}} = \frac{1}{R_1}+ \frac{1}{R_2}+ \frac{1}{R_3}$$

Â 

Â [\[fig:seriesparallel\]]{#fig:seriesparallel
label="fig:seriesparallel"}

Â [\[fig:effective\]]{#fig:effective label="fig:effective"}

Derivation of Series/Parallel Resistor formulas (not examinable, but worthwhile understanding)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Series]{.ul}

There are some key facts about the electromagnetic force that you need
to know in order to derive the equations about. The first is that the
electromagnetic force is a *conservative* force. This means many things
depending on what aspect of the EM force you want to examine. For us, it
tells us that the work done to move a charge from one point to another,
doesn't depending on the path taken. For instance in
FigureÂ [\[fig:seriesparallel:series\]](#fig:seriesparallel:series){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seriesparallel:series"}, if we move a charge from $a$ to
$b$, the work done doesn't depending on whether we go through the cell
or the resistors. It just depends on the distance between the two
points. Now, we can ask ourselves, well what happens if we ask about the
potential difference from point $a$ to point $a$, we can view this as
the electron not moving, or by going all the way around the circuit.
Well, the potential difference has to be zero. Which means that the
potential differences across each component have to add up to zero. If
we label the potential difference between point $a$ and point $b$ by
$V_{ab}$ Then we have the following formulas $$V_{aa} = 0$$ and
$$V_{aa} =  V_{in} - (V_{ax} + V_{xy} + V_{yb}),$$ where I've labelled
the cell as having a positive potential difference and the resistors as
having a negative potential difference. So we have that
$$\label{eq:Vsum}V_{in} = V_{ax}+ V_{xy} + V_{yb}.$$

*So the voltage provided by the cell is distributed between the
components of a circuit*

Now if we again consider
FigureÂ [\[fig:seriesparallel:series\]](#fig:seriesparallel:series){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seriesparallel:series"}, we can use some basic physicaly
intuition about current to arrive at the formulas for effective
resistance of a series circuit. The core feature to notice, is that
current is the amount of charge flowing past a point in the circuit. As
the charges are the same sign (electrons are all negatively charged)
they don't want to get bunched up in any one area. That means that the
current at any point in a wire is the same. Resistors don't affect this
rule, so the current at points $a,x,y,b$ has the same value. Because the
charge can't go anywhere else. There is only one path for each electron
to take. So the current going through each resistor is the same as the
current at point $a$, which we will call $I$.

Then using Ohm's Law: $V_i= I\cdot R_i$, where $i=1,2,3$ and represents
the resistance and potential difference across the resistors
$R_1, R_2, R_3$. Then using
EquationÂ [\[eq:Vsum\]](#eq:Vsum){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:Vsum"} and that $V_{in} = I \cdot R_{\text{eff}}$, we get
that: $$\begin{aligned}
  V_{in} = I\cdot R_{\text{eff}} = I \cdot (R_1 + R_2 + R_3)\end{aligned}$$
And so by dividing by $I$, we get the formula for resistors in series:
$$R_{\text{eff}} = R_1 + R_2 + R_3$$

[Parallel]{.ul}

To derive the formula for the parallel resistors, we again start with
the same facts about the electromagnetic force. Using
FigureÂ [\[fig:seriesparallel:parallel\]](#fig:seriesparallel:parallel){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seriesparallel:parallel"} as our example and starting
with the fact that the potential difference between two points doesn't
depend on the path between those two points. So for instance, the
potential difference between points $d$ and $e$ in
FigureÂ [\[fig:seriesparallel:parallel\]](#fig:seriesparallel:parallel){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:seriesparallel:parallel"}, doesn't depend on whether you
go through the cell or across the parallel resistors. So it's value
should match that of the cell, $V_{in}$. This means that the potential
difference across all of the resistors is equal to potential difference
between $d$ and $e$, because of the path independence.

Next we examine the current across the circuit, imagine that across the
cell we have a current of $I$. The current is a measure of how much
charge flows past a point, and our charges aren't allowed to "build up"
at any point on the circuit. That means the current flowing through
point $d$, has to match that flowing through point $e$, no more, no
less. So the amount of charge flowing through the resistors has to add
up to the amount of charge flowing through $d$. If we label the current
flowing through $R_1,R_2,R_3$ as $I_1, I_2, I_3$, the have the following
expression $$I_a = I_1 + I_2 + I_3$$

Then again using Ohm's law, we get that
$$I = \frac{V_{in}}{R_{\text{eff}}} = I_1 + I_2 + I_3 = V_{in}(\frac{1}{R_1}+\frac{1}{R_2}+\frac{1}{R_3})$$

Which by the eliminating the potential difference from the equation, we
get that
$$\frac{1}{R_{\text{eff}}} = \frac{1}{R_1}+ \frac{1}{R_2}+ \frac{1}{R_3}$$

Electromotive force
===================

Lets clear some things up right away. Electromotive force or *EMF*, is
not a force, its actually an *energy-per unit charge* quantity so its
measured in *volts*.

EMF is basically the potential difference a cell when it delivers no
current. So if you were to take a battery at home, and a voltmeter and
measure the voltage across the two terminal of the battery (assuming
that the battery has no **internal resistance** and the voltmeter has no
resistance) what you would be measuring is the EMF.EMF is given the
symbol $\mathcal{E}$

Batteries, solar cells, generators are all called *sources of EMF*, as
they provide the energy to cause a current to flow.

Internal Resistance
-------------------

This viewpoint of EMF is an idealised one. In real life, the sources of
EMF have some resistance of their own which impedes the conversion of
the energy stored in the battery to the motion of the charges. This is
called *internal resistance* and is denoted by lower case $r$. If the
source obeys Ohm's law, then the voltage across the terminals of the
cells will measure a voltage of
$$V_{ab} = \mathcal{E} - Ir \label{eq:EMF_PD}$$

The current in the circuit attached the cell still obeys $V_{ab} = IR$,
and so we can write the current as follows:

$$I = \frac{\mathcal{E}}{R+r}$$

So it's worth noting that if you are provided with an EMF and an
internal resistance, you need to calculate the potential difference
across the circuit by
EquationÂ [\[eq:EMF_PD\]](#eq:EMF_PD){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:EMF_PD"}, which will be difference to the EMF.

Potential Dividing Circuits
===========================

A potential dividing circuits (often just refered to as a potential
divider) is any circuit that can produce a different "output" voltage
that is a fraction of the "input" voltages. These circuits are typically
fairly simple, with the simplest being two resistors in series:

(0,2) to\[R,l=$R_1$\] (2,2) to\[R,l=$R_2$\] (4,2) to (4,3) to\[battery1,
a=$V_{in}$\] (0,3) to (0,2) (0.1,2) to (0.1,1) to (1,1)
node\[component\]$V_{out}$ to (1.9,1) to (1.9,2);

This is the sort of circuit you may be presented with. However, this
isn't the most enlightening way to show you when we use potential
dividers.

A more informative ciruit is given by:

(0,0) to\[R,l=$R_1$\] (0,2) (0,0) to\[R,l=$R_2$\] (0,-2) (0,2)
to\[short,-o\] (-1,2) node\[above\]$V_{in}$ (0,-2) node\[ground\] (0,0)
to\[short,-o\] (1.5,0) node\[above\]$V_{out}$;

In this circuit we have an input potential difference, which could be
provided by the mains in your house for instance. And we then have a
simple circuit which will change the output potential difference by
connecting a resistor series between in the input wire and ground or
neutral. As mains in the UK is $\SI{240}{\volt}$, and USB is typically
$\SI{5}{\volt}$, these sorts of circuits will be used everyday.

If we consider the first circuits (the closed one) we can use Ohm's law
to write a formula for $V_{out}$. Recalling that the current around the
circuit is the same everywhere as we are dealing with a series circuit.
We have that $I = \frac{V_{in}}{R_{tot}}$ and also
$I = \frac{V_1}{R_1} = \frac{V_2}{R_2}$. So specifically we have that:
$$V_i = V_{in} \frac{R_i}{R_{tot}}.$$

Kirchoff's Laws
===============

Not all circuits can be reduced so a simple square, some take on the
forms such as this:

(0,0) node\[below\]c to (2,0) node\[below\]b to (4,0) node\[below\]d
(4,0) to\[R\] (4,2) (0,2) to\[battery1\] (0,0) (0,2) to (2,2) (2,2)
node\[above\]a to\[battery1\] (2,0) (2,2) to (4,2);

To help deal with these sorts of situations there are a set of rules
called Kirchoff's Rules. Its a small set, consisting of only two rules.
But there require some definitions.

[Definition: Junction]{.ul}\
A junction is the meeting point of 3 lines.

So for instance, a and b are junctions, whereas c and d are not.

[Definition: Loop]{.ul}\
A loop is any closed path within a circuit.

So to tackle this, start to label current directions on the circuit. We
do this without knowing exactly how the current is flowing. But
Kirchoffs Rules will give us negative values for the current if we have
labelled them the wrong way around. So it doesn't matter. So consider
the following:

(0,0) node\[below\]c to (2,0) node\[below\]b to (4,0) node\[below\]d
(4,0) to\[R,i\<=$I_2$\] (4,2) (0,2) to\[battery1, i=$I_1$\] (0,0) (0,2)
to\[short, i=$I_1$\] (2,2) (2,2) node\[above\]a to\[battery1,i=$I_3$\]
(2,0) (2,2) to\[short, i=$I_2$\] (4,2) (2,0) to\[short, i=$I_1$\] (0,0)
(1,1) node\[scale=4\]$\circlearrowright$ (1,1) node$A$ (3,1)
node\[scale=4\]$\circlearrowright$ (3,1) node$B$;

here I've assumed some directions for the currents and i've labelled two
of the three loops we have. We then start to by examining the junctions.
So looking at junction $a$, we have that $I_1 + I_3 - I_2 = 0$, because
we say that a current is entering the junction if the arrow points to
the junction, and if the arrow points away from the junction it's
negative.

[^1]: Fun fact, the word electric comes from the Greek word *elektron*
    which means amber.

[^2]: One of these conventions is that it is the positive charge that
    moves. This means that you understanding of electrons flowing with
    often butt up against this convention. So be aware.

[^3]: A fundamental particle is just on object which, as far as we know,
    has no sub-structure. Electrons, neutrinos, muons, taus etc are all
    fundamental. It was once though that protons and neutrons were
    fundamental particles, however it was discovered that they are made
    up of quarks.

[^4]: Prove to yourself that this value is roughly correct.

[^5]: The actual definition by SI is given in terms of forces between
    two parallel rods. In fact a lot of these units are potentially
    going to be *redefined* in terms of *fundamental constants*. For
    instance it has been proposed that the Coulomb be defined to be so
    that the electron has the exact value of
    $-1.6021766208 \times 10^{-19}C$ for its charge.

[^6]: Appreciating where your electricity comes from is a hot topic at
    the moment. The main forms either being from coal and gas plants,
    that burn fossil fuels to create super-heated steam to turn
    turbines, or, renewable energy production such as solar panels, wind
    farms, tidal generators. Nuclear fission is also a procedure to
    produce energy, and arguably has the biggest controversy around it.
    You will learn about nuclear fission reactors within your A level
    physics course.

[^7]: except for superconductors, but will get to that some other time
